EP-0794561-A1
contentimgPresent invention relates to a method of producing a silicon single crystal thin film on a semiconductor single crystal substrate in vapor-phase growth. An apparatus shown in Fig. 2, for example, is generally used for performing a method of producing a silicon single crystal thin film (hereinafter simply referred to as a thin film) on a semiconductor single crystal substrate (hereinafter simply referred to as a substrate) in vapor-phase growth. In the figure, a vapor-phase growth apparatus 10 has a transparent quartz glass vessel 16 with a gas supply port 14 and a gas exhaust port 15 both opening in the vessel 16. The substrate 11 is placed on a susceptor 12 inside the quartz glass vessel 16. The substrate 11 rotates on a rotary shaft 13, while it is heated by radiation heating means 18 mounted above and below the quartz glass vessel 16. After the substrate 11 is   heated up to a temperature, at which a thin film is grown on the substrate in a satisfactory manner, for example of 800°C to 1200°C, a process gas 20 comprising a carrier gas and a reactant raw material gas is fed to a main surface of the substrate 11 and thereby the thin film is grown on the main surface of the substrate 11 by a chemical reaction of the process gas 20. It has been known that fine peaks and valleys are sometimes given birth to on a surface of a silicon single crystal thin film in vapor-phase growth of the thin film and that the peaks and valleys are more amplified in size as the thickness of the thin film increases. No clear cause for the phenomena of amplification, however, has been known. An estimation has been accepted that a surface of a thin film would be oxidized by water molecules and the oxidized surface would be then reduced by hydrogen gas to create fine pits on the surface of the thin film, in the presence of water inside the vapor-phase growth apparatus for producing the thin film. Because of the inevitable presence of water, investigation through experiments on any imaginable causes other than the affection of water has not been able to be performed. It has been also known from experiences that the surface condition of the thin film varies between very smooth and very poor even in an ambient of a constant water concentration. As described above, because of no clear knowledge about causes and creation mechanism of the peaks and valleys, a smooth surface of a silicon single crystal   thin film has not been produced in vapor-phase growth in a stable manner. The inventor has made a deep research on a chemical reaction for growing a silicon single crystal thin film. The followings are findings, insights from and knowledge related to the findings. Silicon chloride raw material mixed with hydrogen gas is very often used when silicon single crystal thin films are industrially produced. According to the law of mass action, which is one of the fundamental rules in chemistry, it should be effective to suppress the corrosive action of hydrogen gas by making decomposition products of silicon chloride raw material generated together with hydrogen chloride to absorb onto the   surface of the thin film. Based on these insights and knowledge, the inventor has reached to an idea as set forth below. The inventor has made the present invention as the results of research additionally conducted based on the above mentioned findings from experiments, insights and knowledge of the inventor's. It is an object of the present invention to provide a method of producing a silicon single crystal thin film,   wherein a smooth surface of the thin film is obtainable in a stable manner. The above equation (1) is derived from an assumption of a model that molecules of silicon chloride are in the first place adsorbed on a surface of a silicon single crystal and   subsequently silicon atoms are formed to be as a thin film through a chemical reaction with hydrogen. Below, description will be given to the present invention by way of examples. Exampl 1 shows a relation between concentrations of a raw material gas at the gas supply port of a production apparatus and growth rates. In cases that silicon single crystal substrates were respectively heated at 800°C, 950°C and 1125°C, in which conditions a chemical reaction according to a model shown in   Fig. 3 is conducted, relative growth rates in percentage in reference to the maximum growth rate being set as 100 % at each growth temperature were plotted as a function of the concentrations (mol %) of a raw material gas at the supply port 14 in a graph. The results are shown in the graph of Fig. 1. Here, the maximum growth rate at each growth temperature is defined as a growth rate when the increase of the growth rate substantially ceases at said growth temperature while a concentration of a raw material gas is still increased. As seen in Fig. 1, a growth rate at a growth temperature is increased according as a concentration of a raw material gas increases. In a traditional way of vapor phase growth, a growth rate has been selected from a region of low concentrations of a raw material gas, where a growth rate is increased in a linear relationship with a concentration of the raw material gas, and thereby a desired concentration of the raw material gas is set with ease. On the other hand, in the region of high concentrations where a growth rate is equal to or exceeds a value of 80 % of the maximum growth rate at a growth temperature, an increasing rate of the growth rate slow down gradually or shows virtually no increase while concentration of the raw material gas increases. The region of high concentrations has not been utilized for production because of a great amount of necessary consumption of the raw material.  Silicon single crystal thin films of 1 µm to 10 µm thick were grown in the conditions of the example 1 and each surface of the thin films was measured with a surface-roughness measuring instrument using scattering of laser light. It was found that a smooth surface was obtained in a stable manner in a region of high concentrations where a growth rate is equal to or higher than 80 % of the maximum growth rate. It was also confirmed that a surface roughness of a thin film became more conspicuously worsened as a growth rate was lessened from 80 % of the maximum growth rate downward. A growth rate is proportional to a molar concentration of hydrogen and to a coverage proportion by decomposition products from silicon chloride such as trichlorosilane. More particularly, when a growth rate is equal to or higher than 80 % of the maximum growth rate at given growth conditions, a coverage proportion by decomposition products from silicon chloride raw material becomes 80 % or higher. When a molar concentration ratio of silicon chloride raw material to hydrogen is so set that a coverage proportion  by silicon chloride is 0.8 or higher, a growth rate becomes equal to or exceeds 80 % of the maximum growth rate, and a smooth surface of the thin film is obtained in a stable manner. Example 2 shows a relation between a ratio of a growth rate to the maximum growth rate and a surface roughness of a silicon single crystal thin film. In the example 2, experiments were conducted on 25 substrates of 100 mm to 200 mm in diameter at a growth temperature in the range of 800°C to 1150°C for growing thin films of 1 µm to 10 µm thick. Silicon single crystal thin films were grown on the above substrates by using of the above growth conditions under the conditions as those in the example 1. Surface roughness of the thin film were measured with a surface-roughness measuring instrument using scattering of laser light and results are shown in Fig. 4. As seen in Fig. 4, thin films each having a smooth surface were obtained in a stable manner in the region of the growth rate equal to or higher than 80 % of the maximum growth rate. As described above, according to the present invention, a silicon single crystal thin film with a smooth surface can be advantageously obtained in a stable manner by controlling   a growth rate of a thin film so as to be equal to or higher than 80 % of the maximum growth rate at the growth temperature. A method of producing a silicon single crystal thin film on a semiconductor single crystal substrate in vapor-phase growth comprising the steps of: mixing silicon chloride raw material with hydrogen H2 gas to form a process gas; and supplying the process gas to a semiconductor single crystal substrate at a growth temperature, wherein the silicon single crystal thin film is grown at a growth rate equal to or higher than 80 % of the maximum growth rate at the growth temperature. A method of producing a silicon single crystal thin film as claimed in claim 1, wherein a coverage proportion by decomposition products of silicon chloride raw material on a surface of said silicon single crystal thin film is 80 % or higher. A method of producing a silicon single crystal thin film as claimed in claim 2, wherein said silicon chloride raw material is one selected from a group consisting of tetrachlorosilane SiCl4, trichlorosilane SiHCl3 and dichlorosilane SiH2Cl2 and said decomposition products covering the surface of said silicon single crystal thin film are SiCl and/or SiCl2. A method of producing a silicon single crystal thin film as claimed in claim 3, wherein silicon chloride raw material is trichorosilane, supply rates of trichlorosilane and hydrogen are determined by the following equation (1) at a growth temperature in a range of 800°C to 1200°C so that a coverage proportion  by said decomposition products on the surface of said silicon single crystal thin film is 0.8 or higher, [SiHCl3]/[H2]= Kr/(1-)KadKad = 2.72 x 106 exp(-1.72 x 105/RT) Kr = 5.63 x 103 exp(-1.80 x 105/RT)     , wherein Kad is an adsorption rate constant of trichlorosilane on a surface of a single crystal and Kr is a growth rate constant of Si on a surface of a single crystal, [SiHCl3] and [H2] are respectively molar concentrations (mol/m3) of SiHCl3 and H2 on the surface of the single crystal, R is an ideal gas constant (J/mol·K), and T is a gas temperature (K). 
